Feature 337 xml spec doc (#351)
dtcenter/METdatadb: docs/Users_Guide/load_data.rst

(mysql, mariadb, or aurora).

Create Database
---------------

Before using the METdbLoad module, the database **must** exist and have the proper permissions
(i.e. grant privileges to insert, delete, update, and index).

Data must be loaded into a database which has the prefix \'\mv_\'\,
(e.g. mv_met_data). This database must be structured with the METviewer
mv_mysql.sql schema:

.. code-block:: ini

  cd [install]/metviewer
  mysql -u[db_username] -p[db_password] -e'create database [db_name];'
  mysql -u[db_username] -p[db_password] [db_name] < sql/mv_mysql.sql

- Replace *db_usenamer* with the username

- Replace *db_passwd* with the password

- Replace *db_name* with the appropriate database name that begins with **mv** (e.g. mv_xyz )

.. note::
 Use the mysql command line client (https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/en/mysql.html) to run the above instructions.

 The *mv_mysql.sql* file is located in the METdataio/METdbLoad/sql/ directory.

.. dropdown:: Create MET linetype tables

 mysql -udbuser -pdbpasswd dbtable_name < /path-to-METdataio/METdbLoad/sql/mv_mysql.sql

>     - Replace *path-to-METdataio* with the path where the METdataio source code is saved

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Replace *dbuser* with the username
    - Replace *dbpasswd* with the password
    - Replace *dbtable_name* with the appropriate database name that begins with **mv** (e.g. mv_xyz )
    - Replace *path-to-METdataio* with the path where the METdataio source code is saved
```
It looks like we lost the other entries that we had previously, I think.  Please correct me if I am wrong.

@jprestop I see the suggested text, are you looking at a stale version of the  documentation: https://metdataio.readthedocs.io/en/feature_337_xml_spec_doc/Users_Guide/load_data.html???

Reviewer: @bikegeek this is in the Create MET linetype tables section.

Reviewer: @bikegeek You should be able to click "Commit suggestion" here if you agree.

.. dropdown:: Another **example XML specification file** that is **valid**

    For specifying a list of input data files using the load_files element:

    .. literalinclude:: ../../METdbLoad/test/Examples/example_load_specific_files.xml

.. dropdown:: The **XML schema** that is used to **validate the XML specification file**

    .. literalinclude:: ../../METdbLoad/ush/load_specification_schema.xsd

Create the XML Specification File
===================================

The XML load specification file contains the database connection information, data file location, and other instructions for
loading the data into the database.

Create the  XML load specification file by copying the example specification file
*METdataio/METdbLoad/test/Examples/example_load_specification.xml* file to the workspace location.

**Do not save this XML specification file where it can be read by anyone who should not have access to this information,
as this file contains the database password.**

.. code-block:: ini

   cp $METDATAIO_HOME/METdbLoad/test/Examples/example_load_specification.xml  path-to-your-dir/load_specification.xml

> - $METDATAIO is the path to the location of the cloned or forked METdataio source code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- $METDATAIO_HOME is the path to the location of the cloned or forked METdataio source code.
```
I believe this needs to be $METDATAIO_HOME and not $METDATAIO as the path references $METDATAIO_HOME.

Reviewer: @bikegeek You should be able to click "Commit suggestion" here if you agree.

Background
**********

The METdbLoad module provides support for inserting MET output data (as .stat files) into a relational database
(mysql, mariadb, or aurora).

Before using the METdbLoad module, the database **must** exist and have the proper permissions
(i.e. grant privileges to insert, delete, update, and index).  Next, use *mv_mysql.sql* and the mysql command
line client (https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/en/mysql.html) to create the tables corresponding to the MET line types.
The *mv_mysql.sql* file is located in the METdataio/METdbLoad/sql/ directory.

.. dropdown:: Create MET linetype tables

>  mysql -udbuser -pdbpasswd dbtable_name</path-to-METdataio/METdbLoad/sql/mv_mysql.sql

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 mysql -udbuser -pdbpasswd dbtable_name </path-to-METdataio/METdbLoad/sql/mv_mysql.sql>
```
Please verify, but I think there needs to be a space after dbtable_name and an ending ">".  If that is correct, you should be able to just commit this suggested change.

>  mysql -udbuser -pdbpasswd dbtable_name</path-to-METdataio/METdbLoad/sql/mv_mysql.sql

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 mysql -u<dbuser> -p<dbpasswd> <dbtable_name> </path-to-METdataio/METdbLoad/sql/mv_mysql.sql>
```
I added "<>" for all values that need replacing and will suggest updates to the text below.  I thought it might be more clear.

Author: This is a mysql command, the < is a redirect.

Reviewer: Phew! I'm glad you're paying attention.  Please pardon my ignornace!

>     - Replace *dbuser* with the username

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Replace *<dbuser>* with the username
```

>     - Replace *dbpasswd* with the password

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Replace *<dbpasswd>* with the password
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- Replace *dbtable_name* with the database table name
```
Again, not sure if this is correct/needed or not, so please verify.

>     - Replace *path-to-METdataio* with the path where the METdataio source code is saved

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Replace *<dbtable_name>* with the database table name     

    - Replace *<path-to-METdataio>* with the path where the METdataio source code is saved
```

The METdbLoad script *met_db_load.py* performs loading of data based on settings in an XML specification file.
The XML specification file contains database connection information, the location of data to be loaded, and other
settings relevant to the type of data that is being loaded. The XML specification is validated against a schema to check
that the file is valid.  This validation is necessary to prevent extremely large payloads or recursive
payloads that can compromise the loading of data.
The elements in the XML specification file **must** adhere to the **order specified** by the
XML schema and conform to size and number of element limitations.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click to expand the example XML specifications and the XML validation schema below.

```

> .. dropdown:: This is an **example XML specification file** that is **valid**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. dropdown:: An **example XML specification file** that is **valid**
```

    For defining data organized by dates using the folder_tmpl element:

    .. literalinclude:: ../../METdbLoad/test/Examples/example_load_specification.xml

> .. dropdown:: This is another **example XML specification file** that is **valid**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. dropdown:: Another **example XML specification file** that is **valid**
```

    For specifying a list of input data files using the load_files element:

    .. literalinclude:: ../../METdbLoad/test/Examples/example_load_specific_files.xml

> .. dropdown:: This is the **XML schema** that is used to **validate the XML specification file**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. dropdown:: The **XML schema** that is used to **validate the XML specification file**
```

    .. literalinclude:: ../../METdbLoad/ush/load_specification_schema.xsd

Create the XML Specification File
===================================

The XML specification file contains the database connection information, data file location, and instructions for
loading the data into the database.

Create your own XML specification file by copying the example specification file
*METdataio/METdbLoad/test/Examples/example_load_specification.xml* file to a
location in your workspace.

**Do not save this XML specification file where it can be read by anyone who should not have access to this information,
as this file contains the database password.**

.. code-block:: ini

   cp $METDATAIO_HOME/METdbLoad/test/Examples/example_load_specification.xml  path-to-your-dir/load_specification.xml

> - $METDATAIO is the path to the location of the cloned or forked METdataio source code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- $METDATAIO_HOME is the path to the location of the cloned or forked METdataio source code.
```

> - Replace the *path-to-your-dir* with the actual path to where this file is to be saved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Replace the *path-to-your-dir* with the actual path to where this file will be saved.
```

Change directory to the location where the *example_load_specification.xml* file was copied.

.. code-block:: ini

   cd path-to-your-dir/load_specification.xml

> - replace *path-to-your-dir* with the full path where you are saving the XML specification file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Replace *path-to-your-dir* with the full path where the XML specification file will be saved.
```

Using a text editor of your choice, make the necessary edits
to the required elements and delete any optional, unused/irrelevant elements, based on the explanation below (click to
expand). Remember to update the username and password that is applicable to your database.

> .. dropdown:: The following is an explanation of the required and optional elements and any limitations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. dropdown:: An explanation of the required and optional elements and any limitations
```

  *These are element names. The XML angle brackets (<>) as seen in the XML specification file are omitted for simplicity*

>   **!!!NOTE!!!**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ..note::
```
See "Notes" in our documentation for more info: https://metplus.readthedocs.io/en/develop/Contributors_Guide/documentation.html#notes
It seems like a good place to use it here.

>   The **order of the elements** in the XML specification file is crucial. **DO NOT** modify the order of the following elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    
    The **order of the elements** in the XML specification file is crucial. **DO NOT** modify the order of the following elements.
```

>   Indentation is used to indicate hierarchical relationships between elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Indentation is used to indicate hierarchical relationships between elements.
```

    .. dropdown::   load_spec

      - **mandatory**
      - top-level tag/element
      - container for other elements that define connection information, flags, data input, etc.

>     *The following elements pertain to logging into the database*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *The following elements pertain to logging into the database.*
```

              - allowable characters (combination of any of these):

                 - upper and lower case alphabetical characters (English)
                 - digits 0-9
                 - _,- (underscore, dash)

           .. dropdown::  password

             - **mandatory**
             - the password to access the database
             - minimum number of characters is 3
             - maximum number of characters is 30
             - all characters are allowed

           .. dropdown:: local_infile

             - **optional**
             - argument passed into 3rd party Python library pymysql

               - for establishing a connection to a MySQL server
               - indicate whether the input file is local
               - default is False
               - enables use of the LOAD DATA LOCAL command

               - Accepted value:
                 - Boolean value: True or False

                   - True if loading local data
                   - False otherwise

               - delete this element if loading of local data is not needed

                  - METdataio sets default to False if this element is absent

>     *The following elements are used to define the format of multiple input data directories that are (optionally) organized by datetime*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *The following elements are used to define the format of multiple input data directories that are (optionally) organized by datetime.*
```

       - True or False (case insensitive)

     .. dropdown:: apply_indexes

       - **optional**
       - indicate whether to apply database indexes
       - True or False (case insensitive)

     .. dropdown:: load_stat

       - **optional**
       - indicate whether or not to load STAT data
       - True or False (case insensitive)

     .. dropdown:: load_mode

       - **optional**
       - indicate whether or not to load MODE data
       - True or False (case insensitive)

     .. dropdown:: load_mtd

       - **optional**
       - indicate whether or not to load MODE TD (MODE Time Domain) data
       - True or False (case insensitive)

     .. dropdown:: load_mpr

       - **optional**
       - indicate whether or not to load MPR (matched pair) data
       - True or False (case insensitive)

     .. dropdown:: load_orank

       - **optional**
       - indicate whether or not to load ORANK (observed rank) data
       - True or False (case insensitive)

     .. dropdown:: force_dup_file

       - **optional**
       - indicate whether or not to force load paths/files that already exist
       - True or False (case insensitive)

>     *The following elements indicate which group the database should be assigned and a description*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *The following elements indicate which group the database should be assigned and a description.*
```

     .. dropdown::  group

       - **optional**
       - the name of the database group (databases are grouped in METviewer: e.g. Testing)
       - if undefined, the database will be placed under the NO GROUP group
       - minimum number of characters is 1
       - maximum number of characters is 300
       - acceptable characters (English), any combination:

         - upper and/or lower case alphabetic characters
         - any digits 0-9
         - _, . , - (underscore, period, dash)

     .. dropdown::  description

       - **optional**
       - description of the database
       - minimum number of characters is 1
       - maximum number of characters is 300
       - acceptable characters (English), any combination:

         - upper and/or lower case alphabetic characters
         - any digits 0-9
         - _, . , - (underscore, period, dash)

    **Determine whether to use folder_tmpl or load_files to define where your input data resides (descriptions below):**

>     *The following defines the location of the input data to be loaded into the database based on data organized by datetime (and any other criteria)*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *The following defines the location of the input data to be loaded into the database based on data organized by datetime (and any other criteria).*
```

                      .. dropdown:: the "valid_dates" name attribute value was assigned in the date_list portion of the XML specification file

                             **<date_list name="valid_dates">**

                                 <start>2022050100</start>

                                 <end>2022051200</end>

                                 <inc>0600</inc>

                                 <format>yyyyMMddHH</format>

                             </date_list>

            .. dropdown:: met_out

               - corresponds to the {met_out} template

               .. dropdown:: val

                   - for defining non-datetime subdirectories

                     - maximum number of *val* elements is 100

                    e.g.:

                       <field name="met_out">

                         <val>grid_stat_cmn</val>

                         <val>point_stat_cmn</val>

                       </field>

          *For this folder_tmpl example, which has all the data under one directory (no datetime subdirectories):*

            .. dropdown:: /var/autofs/mnt/hostmachine/projects/RRFS/prototype/met_out/metprd/point_stat

>     *The following defines the location of specific input data files to be loaded into the database*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *The following defines the location of specific input data files to be loaded into the database.*
```

     .. dropdown:: load_files

        - for specifying the location of individual data files that are in different directories

        .. dropdown:: file

           - **mandatory** for defining location of specific data files

             - maximum number of data files: 200

             Example:

                <load_files>

                    <file>/met_out/mode/mode_MASK_POLY_300000L_20120410_180000V_060000A_cts.txt</file>

                    <file>/met_out/rhist/ensemble_stat_RRFS_GEFS_GF.SPP.SPPT_RETOP_MRMS_20220507_120000V.stat</file>

                </load_files>

>     *The following describe the linetypes to load*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *The following describe the linetypes to load.*
```

     .. dropdown:: line_type

        - **optional**
        - which MET output linetypes to load
        - if omitted, then **all linetypes** will be loaded
        - maximum number of line_type elements: 1

         *val* element defines which MET output linetypes to load

        .. dropdown:: val

          - the MET output linetype

            - linetype name (refer to the MET User's Guide for a complete list of linetypes)

              Example:

                   <line_type>

                        <val>ECNT</val>

                        <val>VL1L2</val>

                        <val>SAL1L2</val>

                   </line_type>

>     *The following option allows one to indicate whether to save the XML commands into the database*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *The following option allows one to indicate whether to save the XML commands into the database.*
```

     .. dropdown:: load_xml

         - **optional**
         - Option to save the XML  into the database
         - Only takes effect when the *load_note* element is present
         - Acceptable values: TRUE or FALSE (case-insensitive)
         - Default value: TRUE

         Example:

         <load_xml>true</load_xml>

>     *The following allows one to create a note into the instance_info database table*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *The following allows one to create a note into the instance_info database table.*
```

Background
**********

The METdbLoad module provides support for inserting MET output data (as .stat files) into a relational database
(mysql, mariadb, or aurora).

Before using the METdbLoad module, the database **must** exist and have the proper permissions
(i.e. grant privileges to insert, delete, update, and index).  Next, use *mv_mysql.sql* and the mysql command
line client (https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/en/mysql.html) to create the tables corresponding to the MET line types.
The *mv_mysql.sql* file is located in the METdataio/METdbLoad/sql/ directory.

.. dropdown:: Create MET linetype tables

>  mysql -udbuser -pdbpasswd dbtable_name</path-to-METdataio/METdbLoad/sql/mv_mysql.sql

Reviewer: @bikegeek Do we also need a line for " - Replace *dbtable_name* with the database table name"?

Author: added the following bullet:
Replace *dbtable_name* with the appropriate database name that begins with **mv** (e.g. mv_xyz )

to reinforce the mv_ prefix to table names

  * - Solution:
    - This error is caused when attempting to load data into a database that does not exist.  You will need to create the database, set up the appropriate privileges as outlined above, and load the schema using the mv_mysql.sql file.

  * -  Error:
    -  /full-path-to/xyz.xml is not valid and may contain a recursive payload or an excessively large payload

  * - Solution:
    - This error is typically encountered when one of the following conditions exist as a result of failing the XML validation step:

>          - the order of the elements in your XML specification file is inconsistent with the order expected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         - the order of the elements in the XML specification file is inconsistent with the order expected
```
We try to keep "you" language out of the guides.  Suggest changing to "the" unless you think it is unclear.

>          - your XML specification file is missing one or more mandatory elements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         - the XML specification file is missing one or more mandatory elements
```

         - one or more elements has exceeded size limits specified in the XML schema

>          - you have addition XML elements that are not expected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         - there are additional XML elements that are not expected
```

>        **Refer to the section **Create the XML Specification File** to verify that your XML specification file is correct.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       **Refer to the section **Create the XML Specification File** to verify that the XML specification file is correct.**
```
